# Religious and Political Preferences 
#### Relating to: [Proposed format](https://github.com/LibertyHomesteads/GroupLandBuyMO/blob/main/.github/workflows/GeneralStructure.md) for a group land buy under the "Return to the Land" movement. 
#### Zone of Research: Missouri

 ## 7.4 Religious and Political Preferences 
   ### 7.4.1 General Religious Preferences of Group
   * Determine religious preferences of members. Determine whether stating religious or other preferences in official documents or advertising material violates any state or federal discrimination laws. Determine whether any potential members have a strong preference towards prohibiting certain religions or ideologies. Determine a general strategy for addressing the question of religion in relation to the community.  
   ### 7.4.2 Commercial Real Estate and Housing Advertisements
   * According to cases brought under the FHA (Fair Housing Act of 1968), it is illegal to use religious or other potentially discriminatory terms or suggestions in promotions for rental housing or homes for sale to the public. Consider whether we are primary selling homes/land or primarily selling a membership in an LLC. Also, consider making all listings etc "private" i.e. not in the "public marketplace," and see if that legally qualifies us as a "private club." 
   ### 7.4.3 Right to Free Association 
   * The right to free association has to be a premeditated one and explicitly mentioned in the bylaws of a society or association at the time of its formation. Such a right and its subsequent restrictions cannot be imposed only after looking at who is now coming into the organization.  
   * In 2014, the Hobby Lobby supreme court decision recognized a for-profit corporation's claim of religious belief.  
   ### 7.4.4 Relevant US Federal Law 
   * There are two primary issues to consider. The FHA which prohibits many forms of discrimination when it comes to housing, and the Religious Freedom Restoration Act, which protects religious individuals (and now apparently corporations) from some of the restrictions imposted by the FHA. There are also other anti-discrimination laws, which the RFRA may also provide limited protection for. The FHA itself, and relevant case law, provides certain limited exemptions which we will see below, and a recent US Supreme Court decision calls into question a lot of previous anti-discrimination laws when religious expression is taken into consideration. 
   * [From the FHA / HUD:](https://www.fairhousingnc.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/Fair-Housing-and-Religious-Discrimination.pdf) *A religious institution or affiliated organization providing housing may favor or give a preference to persons of the same religion only if: 1) it is offering the housing for non-commercial purposes; and 2) the religion does not discriminate on the basis of race, color or national origin. Even if this limited exception applies, the religious organization can only give a preference based on religion, and may not discriminate based on any of the other protected classes.* 
   * *"[Although RFRA does not impede actions by associations](https://www.hopb.co/blog/community-fellowship-or-losing-your-religion-religious-freedom-in-homeowners-associations), the law potentially affects religious freedom within HOAs because an argument can be made that RFRA limits enforcement of the FHA against certain associations.  Specifically, if an HOA is itself an expressly religious organization, there could potentially be situations in which action by the association would violate the FHA but be protected by RFRA.  See, Burwell v Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc, 134 S.Ct. 2751 (2014).  For example, a religiously affiliated association’s covenant against divorced occupants would probably violate the FHA by discriminating based on familial status but might be protected by RFRA.  This theory has yet to be fully fleshed out by the courts."*
   * * Under the **Equality Act 2010,** if discrimination is justified, it doesn’t count as unlawful discrimination. This is called "objective justification." 
   * An association under the equality act: An incorporated or unincorporated body, that is for profit or not for profit, with at least 25 members. It also *"has rules (not necessarily formal or written) regulating who can be a member and there is a genuine selection process for members."*   
   *A club open to the public on an entry fee is NOT a private club under the 2010 Act, nor is a trade organization. 
   *[The Act says discrimination can be justified](https://onesmartplace.com/all-things-being-equal-is-your-club-breaking-the-law/) if the person who has taken discriminating action, for example the committee or officers of a club, can show that their action is a proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. If necessary, it’s the courts which will decide if discrimination can be justified.  
   * It is unlawful for a private club or other association to discriminate against, harass or victimise an existing or potential member or an associate.  
   * It is unlawful for a private club or other association to discriminate against, harass or victimise a guest or potential guest of the association. A private club cannot refuse to invite a person as a guest of the club, or invite the person on less favourable terms, such as by imposing special conditions, because of the guest’s protected characteristic. (example, a woman being brought in as a guest speaker being made to use the side door while men use the front door.)  
   * A private club or other association cannot restrict membership on the basis of skin colour, but it can restrict membership based on ethnic origin. However, although the rules defining who can join must not use colour, a club could have a name that refers to colour.  
   * A private club that restricts membership to people with a particular protected characteristic may also place similar restrictions on access by associates and guests.  
   * Someone filing a complaint under the Act has 6 months to do so after the discrimination event. 
   
   ### 7.4.5 Relevant Missouri State Law
   * [Missouri RFRA](https://casetext.com/statute/missouri-revised-statutes/title-i-laws-and-statutes/chapter-1-laws-in-force-and-construction-of-statutes/section-1302-religious-freedom-restoration-act)  
   * *"The [Missouri Human Rights Act](https://labor.mo.gov/mohumanrights/discrimination/religion) (the Act) prohibits employers from discriminating against individuals because of their religion in hiring, firing, and other terms and conditions of employment. It also prohibits landlords and housing providers from discriminating against individuals due to their religion in the rental or sale of housing or the terms, conditions or privileges of tenancy. The Act prohibits lenders from discriminating against individuals due to their religion by providing less favorable terms for loans for housing. **The Act applies to employers with six or more employees,** including state and local governments, but **does not include corporations and associations 100 percent owned and operated by religious or sectarian groups that require all its employees to be a member of the religion or sect.** The Act applies to employment agencies, “temp services”, and labor organizations. It also applies to landlords, housing providers, property managers, those selling houses, realtors, and those providing loans for dwellings. The Act covers **all businesses that offer their goods and services to the general public** including local and state governments, and therefore, such entities cannot refuse, withhold from or deny accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges to any person based on their religion."*
   * *"The Missouri Human Rights Act (the Act) protects individuals against discrimination on the bases of race and color. The Act applies to employers with six or more employees, including state and local governments. It also applies to employment agencies, “temp services,” labor organizations, landlords, housing providers, property managers, those selling houses, realtors and those providing loans for dwellings. The Act also covers all businesses that offer their goods and services **to the general public ...**"* (note that another statute provides an exemption for private clubs and religious corporations). 
   ### 7.4.6 Examples of Non-Protected Classes  
   * **Political affiliation and political ideology** are **not** protected classes, and communities may discriminate and refuse sale to someone based on political affiliation, but cannot specifically discriminate based on political "activities" not done on the premises. There is no federal law against this. There are state laws against this in four states but not Missouri.
   * **High or low IQ** (or other measures of general intelligence) is not a protected class. [Disparate impact analysis](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=17444662) can attempt to require a defendant to prove necessity, but since the book of Revelations makes it clear that hard times are coming, a declared-religious community focused on survivalism indeed has a necessity for high IQ individuals.
   * **LGBT individuals (and possibly other groups)** are only [partially protected](https://www.hrw.org/news/2023/06/30/us-supreme-court-erodes-anti-discrimination-laws) per a **recent supreme court decision,** 303 CREATIVE LLC ET AL . v. ELENIS ET AL. On 6/30/2023, they ruled that *"nondiscrimination laws could not be enforced against businesses that offer expressive products and services. The ruling significantly weakens laws that protect LGBT people and others against discrimination."* The case *"involved a web designer who wanted to make wedding websites but worried she would have to create them for same-sex couples because of a law that prohibited discrimination based on sexual orientation. The Court ruled that, because the conduct involved her expression, it was protected speech and the nondiscrimination law could not be applied to her."* It is now up to lower courts to determine what constitutes an "expressive good." Is permaculture landscape design an art form and thus an expressive good? It is also noted that *"The same laws typically prohibit discrimination based on race, sex, nationality, disability, age, gender identity, and other protected classes, and the Court did not indicate that those provisions would be treated any differently. In doing so, it uprooted a decades-old consensus that businesses open to the public could be required to comply with nondiscrimination laws."*
   * **People with criminal records** *"[aren't a protected class](https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/04/04/472878724/denying-housing-over-criminal-record-may-be-discrimination-feds-say) under the Fair Housing Act, and the guidance from HUD's general counsel says that in some cases, turning down an individual tenant because of his or her record can be legally justified."* However, according to the HUD's 2016 guidance, a "blanket policy" of turning down anyone with a criminal record regardless of severity, will negatively affect African Americans, and therefore disparate impact analysis can be used to claim the policy is illegal and discriminatory. Also, landlords/etc who *"reject black or Hispanic applicants ostensibly because of criminal records — but accept a white tenant with a similar criminal record — could be found guilty of violating the Fair Housing Act.*" 
   ### 7.4.7 Private Clubs
   * The federal laws cannot affect any organization, club, etc. that does not have "substantial contact with **interstate commerce.**" Most states, however, probably have similar laws against discrimination. (See above, 7.4.5 Relevant Missouri State Law.) 
     * [FHA - 42 U.S. Code § 3607](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/42/3607) - Religious organization or private club exemption (a) Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. **Nor shall anything in this subchapter prohibit a private club** not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, **from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members.** 
   * *"Under Section 3607(a), **a very narrow, limited exemption exists for explicitly religious organizations that do not own properties for commercial purposes.**  The exemption permits qualifying religious organizations to limit the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings to members of the organization’s religious group, as long as the organization is not acting commercially (i.e., not owning the property for a business purpose).  It’s important to note that what constitutes a “religious organization” under this section is defined strictly.  So, the Catholic Church can limit occupancy of church-owned convents to Catholic nuns, but a country club affiliated with the Knights of Columbus can’t decide to only sell properties it owns to other Catholics.  United States v. Columbus Country Club, 915 F.2d 877 (3d Cir. 1990)"* **My notes: This analysis is not correct, read the next item below.**  
   * [Colombus Country Club vs. United States](https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/osg/briefs/1990/01/01/sg900116.txt) - Interestingly, the country club only didn't meet the private club exemption for a sale, but still would have met it for rentals and occupancy. It's possible that the court could have forced them to sell the annual membership or the property to the non-Catholic woman, but allowed them to prevent her from accessing or residing on the property. Also, it seems **the country club shot itself in the foot by not defining themselves as a religious organization in their founding documents,** thus having to rely on a weak affiliation with the Catholic church to claim religious organization excemption under 42 USC 3607. This affiliation was not recognized by the assenting judges. Despite the webpage we quoted above that claimed it was a very narrow exemption and that CCC lost only because they were a club and not the church itself, the text of the decision does not support that conclusion. Since CCC defined itself as a country club and had nothing in its bylaws defining it as a bona fide religious organization, they had to rely on activist judges confirming their claimed "affiliation" to the Church, which of course the judges did not do.
   * **[In general](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Membership_discrimination_in_California_clubs), private clubs can discriminate against any protected class**, as long as they do not provide services to the public, such as taking payment for food and drinks at meetings or events attended by non-members. Also, in many states, such organizations cannot claim certain tax exemptions or government subsidies.
   * *"[While it is unlawful](https://www.freeadvice.com/legal/can-private-clubs-and-religious-organizations-legally-discriminate/) to discriminate based on race or national origin in public-sectors, **private clubs and religious organizations can legally discriminate** because they are protected by Federal civil rights laws. However, many states have enacted laws that go beyond the Federal laws' protections, both in terms of prohibited conduct and private clubs or organization classification."* Also, ***"Federal civil rights laws do not make it unlawful for bona fide private clubs and religious organizations to discriminate against whatever basis they choose."***
   * **Missouri** state's [discrimination law](https://www.lawserver.com/law/state/missouri/mo-laws/missouri_laws_213-065) states that *" **The provisions of this section shall not apply to a private club,** a place of accommodation owned by or operated on behalf of **a religious corporation, association or society,** or other establishment which is not in fact open to the public, unless the facilities of such establishments are made available to the customers or patrons of a place of public accommodation as defined in section 213.010 and this section."*
   * On determination of whether a club qualifies as a "private club" under the above exemptions: *"Following the passage of the Civil Rights Act in 1965, dozens of businesses and facilities – including swimming pools – tried to argue that they were "private clubs" so that they could exclude African Americans. **The courts quickly developed a test to distinguish between truly "private" organizations and those that only claimed to be.** Very few facilities qualified as truly "private." **In order to be exempt** from the civil rights laws, **a "private" club must truly reserve its facilities for members, and must have genuinely exclusive membership criteria** – a club that will admit anyone who is not African American does not qualify. Courts deciding whether a club is “private” in this sense will consider the history and purpose of the club (including whether it was created to circumvent desegregation), the club advertises for members, it is directly controlled by its members and operated solely for their benefit, and the club is operated for profit."* 
   ### 7.5 Political and philosophical preferences  
   * No anarchists 
   * No nihilists  
   * (Last two items added per RTTL rules)  
   * No [purity spiraling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Purity_spiral)  
